SETI@home reminiscences

Concept (1995):
    Dave Gedye
    Woody Sullivan

First couple of years
    can we do science?
    fundraising
        Planetary society: Charlene Anderson, Lou Friedman
        CA DIMI program: Steve Berman?

startup
    getting hardware and data recorder working
        Jeff, Dan
    front-end data analysis: Eric
    client/server framework, graphics (STNG): me
    Windows: Kyle Granger
    Mac: Charlie Fenton
    Brad Silen

launch and first few years
    hardware
        3 Sparcstations
        Dan: lots of donations
        Sun servers, network appliance
    network
        SSL link, packet exchange
    software
        shared-mem job cache: Eric
    web
        Eric Person
        Eric Heien
    Nathan Chung, Peter Leiser
    ports
        Hiram Clawson
    Forum moderation
        rotating moderators
        Jord van der Elst
    media coverage
        lots of newspapers
        ABC nightly news
        West Wing episode
    1000 years of computing in 1 day

Astropulse, Josh von Korff

United devices (2000)
    We needed a platform
        client updates
    They offered to let us use UD for free (???)
    BOINC (2002)
    lawsuit
        trade secret nonsense
        UC lawyers

Aside:
    SETI@home had lots of eyeballs and lots of computing power.
    Many people over the years saw that as a potential gold mine.
    There were many startups.
    They had different schemes for attracting 'users':
    micropayments, lotteries, or more commonly some kind of cryptocurrency.
    None of the startups had the resources to pull anything off.
    And they tended to overlook a key problem:
    you can't hide data you're computing with on a PC,
    and biotech companies require privacy.

BOINC transition
    solved:
        client update
        cheaters (replication)
        heterogeneity: CPU, GPU separate
    fancier 3-D client graphics
    MySQL DB as well as Informix
    clunky UI; lost about half our users

Funding
    SETI Institute
        animosity from Jill Tarter
        they created 'Team SETI' to compete with us
        John Gertz: Zorro guy
        they wanted our email list
    Joe Firmage, Ann Druyan
        grand science plan based on selling modem ISP?
    We scraped by on Casper money and donations

Advances 2005-2010
    ALFA receiver, multibeam
    switch from DLT tape to disk drives
    revisions to client: more chirp rates, autocorrs
    enhancements by volunteers
        GPUs; CPU acceleration; algorithm improvements
        anonymous platform mechanism
    
NTPKR (2010)
    RFI removal, signal candidate finding
    incremental back-end analysis:
        keep track of 'hot spots',
        re-analyze as new detections arrive
    problems:
        couldn't keep up with incoming data
        hard to evaluate algorithms
    
Doldrums (2010-2016)
    meetings were mostly about
        Informix issues (running out of fragments, shards, IDs etc.)
        hardware failures, sysadmin issues
        fundraising: holiday donations drive
    we didn't talk about the future
    I didn't participate much

Nebula (2016)
    goal:
        do complete analysis of data (12B detections) in 1 day
        create visualizations of
            RFI removal
            pixels, candidates
        Let us iteratively improve algorithms
        
    data format
        dump Informix to flat files
        index them (time, freq) using unix sort, build index file

    initial phase
        adapt NTPKR code
            eliminate class hierarchy
            use flat files
            compare agains NTPKR output
        this part was hard

    computing resources
        needed cluster computing:
            fast access to big data
            a few thousand CPUs
                for candidate finding in 16M pixels
        tried AWS
            disaster; undergrad put key in github
        Atlas cluster (Bruce Allen, Hanover)
            RFI removal on 96-CPU machine, parallel
            pixel analysis using Condor
                could do all pixels in a few hours
        time to move large output data to our servers
        not 1 day, but pretty close

    period of high productivity (c. 2020-21)
        weekly meetings in Campbell
        look at results of Nebula run
        talk about algorithms
        I'd go off and change algorithms, write visualizations
        iterate
    
    birdies
        simulated ET signals
            model planetary motion,
            model what the client would produce (hard; Eric)
        evaluate algorithms
            do we remove birdies as RFI?
            do birdies produce high-ranking candidates?
        use to estimate 'candidate sensitivity':
            power above which we 'discover' most signals
            (i.e. they appear in top 100 rank)
            More meaningful than hardware-level sensitivity

    candidate scoring
        how to combine 3 different scores?
        spent a lot of time on this
        I tried optimization; Chinese guy tried ML
        eventual solution: look at various sums (score variants)
    
    harsh realizations
        only 3% of our observations were slow-moving enough for 128K DFTs
        we had no real way to find non-barycentric signals

Paper writing (2020 - 2024)
    Instrument paper: client algorithm, probabilities of detection types
    Nebula paper: RFI, candidate algorithms; sky coverage; birdies; results

    very rough rough drafts
    c. 2 year hiatus
    resumption
        Tuesdays: I drive to Castro Valley
        Fridays: Eric comes to my house in Berkeley
        extreme productivity, fun

    submitted to Astronomical Journal
    got detailed, excellent referee reports
    spent 6 months processing these;
        big improvements in both papers

    accepted May 2025

Big picture
    SETI@home was a major event in the history of science.
    It directly involved about a million people around the world.
    They actively participated in a wide range of ways.
    They learned about radio SETI.
    For some people it gave them a sense of purpose and value.

    They also paid higher electricity bills.
    The computing produced carbon emissions that contributed to global warming.
    By doing this, we created an obligation for ourselves.
    We needed to do the best science that we could,
    using the data this computing produced.
    If we didn't do so, we'd be wasting all this energy and human effort.
    If we weren't open about the situation, we'd be deceptive.

    For a long time, we were headed in that direction.
    We sort of drifted along.
    There was tremendous inertia.

    But eventually we changed course.
    In the end, I think we did really good science.
    There was some stuff we didn't have the resources to do -
    like studying pulsed signals and autocorrs more carefully -
    but I think we did most of what was possible.

    And I think the 2 papers are excellent.
    They're ground-breaking.
    They set a new standard for SETI papers.

    SETI@home was a team effort.
    We all had different roles, and each role was vital.
    We all spent about 25 years working on SETI@home:
    a big fraction of our careers.
    I think can view this as time well spent.
    We should all be extremely proud.

Lessons learned
    don't use relational DBs for very large data
        millions of items OK, billions not OK
    if you run a science project
        have a clear scientific goal from the start
        write/maintain a paper abstract
    if you run a data-driven project
        develop data analysis software as you go
            don't wait until the end
            We didn't do this, and as a result we wasted a lot
                of our computing power
        develop ways to evaluate your algorithms
        develop ways to visualize your data and data products
    radio SETI sky surveys
        commensal observing:
            makes everything hard (range of slew rates)
            doesn't work well w/ high freq resolution
        need to control telescope;
        need about 2 years to cover visible sky

Matt:
1. The ALF hack.
2. Bill Woodcock.
3. The time the a/c broke over the weekend and I was on pager detail and sped to campus only to be blocked from going up centennial blvd due to a football game.
4. VIP visits: Jim Gray, Wes Boyd, Tim O'Reilly.
5. NetApp NAS donation (whole rack of disks and server that normally costed $150K and was 3TB of storage).
6. SETI Institute also tried to scoop us with their own NTPCkr which failed for the same reasons we'd predicted ours would fail (too much RFI).
7. Early on showing up to work unshowered, unshaven, and with pink hair to find a news crew would be filming our meeting. By the time I got home that night I had a phone message from my sister in Pennsylvania saying, "when did you dye your hair pink?"
8. The switch at the PAIX that needed more RAM as the DNS cache was getting corrupted (?). 
9. The Windows DNS caching that would cause our two data servers to become unbalanced (i.e. we'd have a million workunits to send where id % 2 == 0, but zero where id % 2 == 1).
10. The way I nailed all the cheaters at the end of SETI@home classic - it would have taken too long to scan the whole database looking for redundant work, but instead I just checked every 100th result that was more than enough to identify obvious cheating.
11. That one media crew that plugged two 500W lights into our server rack and blew a couple breakers. 
12. The semester all students returned having discovered kazaa, campus pegged its 100Mb bandwidth limit, and since we were 30% of that they finally forced us to get our own 1Gb link (from Cogent, for $1000/month). 
